Michael LaFosse’s Origami Butterfl ies 
16
Using Fine Quality Art Materials 
When you want your butterfl ies to last for many generations without fading or becoming brittle, be sure to use only 
fi ne art-quality materials. Art papers are formed from stronger fi bers and so they are more durable when wet-fold-
ing. Th ese resiliant papers allow a more artistic shaping than do machine-made papers of highly processed wood 
pulp. High quality papers for fi ne art use cost more because they are made of more expensive raw materials (choice 
fi bers and archival pigment colorants). Th e market for fi ne art materials is small, and so the machinery is smaller 
and less effi  cient. In fact, many fi ne art papers are still made by hand, so labor costs represent a larger fraction of 
the fi nal price. Although many university arts programs have hand paper-making equipment, and although stu-
dent labor is less expensive, fi ne art origami paper making is still a relatively new fi eld. Few art students currently 
make thin, strong sheets suited to folding, and they are more likely to prepare pulp for cast paper sculptures, or to 
form thicker sheets from unusual plants, including unprocessed parts (seeds or twigs) that impede creasing. 
Richly colored, densely patterned, often accented with gold, Yuzen papers 
make the most lovely of origami butterﬂ ies. The papers are durable and can 
be purchased from specialty paper suppliers. If you can’t get to one in person, 
shop online where you can see images of the patterns being offered for sale.
100% cotton rag-content drafting papers are thin, strong, and translu-
cent—perfect for folding butterﬂ ies that reveal the pattern of hidden folds 
and layers. The paper comes in pads and rolls, and is widely available. 
Look for tinted tracing papers, too.
Paper or plastic? Many art and craft supply shops offer foldable sheets 
in a dazzling array of new materials. Pearlescent plastic sheets come 
textured and smooth, and in a rainbow of colors.
The organic, lyrical, swirling, and feathered patterns of marbled papers 
seem to mimic nature and are displayed marvelously on the wings of 
an origami butterﬂ y. If you cannot ﬁ nd the selection you desire, make it 
yourself! Marbling supplies and instructions are widely available. You will 
enjoy the surprise of your own, happy results!
