The Butterﬂ y Project—at the 
Holocaust Museum, Houston 
Several million people were imprisoned and put to death in the Nazi concentra-
tion camps. Only a few survivors were left  to be liberated at the end of World 
War II, and it is important that their stories about the dangers of intolerance 
resonate with the next generation. Th ere is now a special memorial in Texas at 
the Morgan Family Center’s Holocaust Museum in Houston. Paper butterfl ies 
sent to the memorial represent the souls of 1,500,000 innocent children who 
perished in the Holocaust. For information about this memorial, visit hmh.org. 
7
Th e Buff erfl y Project—at the Holocaust Museum, Houston
More than two thousand butterﬂ ies to be added to the hundreds of thousands already collected 
by the Holocaust Museum for the Butterﬂ y Project. The museum’s goal is to collect 1.5 million 
handmade butterﬂ ies to commemorate the children who perished in the Holocaust.
A collection of paper butterﬂ ies created for the Holocaust Museum’s Butterﬂ y Project by a 
tenth grade English class at Henrico High School in Henrico, VA.
in Westford, Massachusetts, an amaz-
ing attraction developed and run by 
entomologist, George Leslie, and his 
family. 
We also constructed large versions 
of Michael’s origami butterfl ies for re-
tail store window displays at Saks Fift h 
Avenue in New York City in 1993, and 
more recently for Hermes of Paris on 
Madison Avenue. In 1996, we opened 
the Origamido Studio, where we taught 
classes, made handmade paper, and 
framed art (including dozens of but-
terfl ies suitable for weddings, anniver-
saries, or birthdays). Even the scraps of 
our handmade papers became origami 
butterfl y earrings and pins that we and 
our students enjoyed folding. 
It’s amazing to think that just a 
few photos of Yoshizawa’s remarkable 
works from Reader’s Digest in 1970 
were enough to trigger an artistic 
metamorphosis! Michael’s origami but-
terfl y design system has evolved a great 
deal since he folded his fi rst original 
model for Alice Gray in 1978. Decades 
later, this book distills Michael’s life-
time of inventive, elegant, and pleasing 
origami butterfl y designs. Th eir overall 
shape and presence, balance, and the 
interrelationship of line, form, and 
color must all be just right before Mi-
chael considers a design complete. He 
oft en thinks of the impact Yoshizawa’s 
art had upon him, and wonders what 
young minds must be thinking when 
their eyes catch their fi rst glimpse of a 
beautiful origami butterfl y.
