We met more serious origami artists at our fi rst origami con-
vention of the Friends of the Origami Center, held in 1992 at a 
public school in New York City. One of the more memorable and 
colorful displays was a collection of brightly patterned origami 
butterfl ies, designed and beautifully folded by Russell Cashdollar, 
a folder from the Washington, D.C. area. 
Inspired by Russell’s work, Michael recalled his Butterfl y 
for Alice Gray that he’d designed and folded in 1978, and he 
began to revisit the potential for his butterfl y base. 
We recently called Russell to ask if he had a photo of those 
original butterfl ies from 1992 that we might add to this book. 
We began to reminisce with him about how his display had 
inspired Michael to revisit earlier works. Russell recalled that 
his butterfl ies had also prompted the noted origami creator 
and author, John Montroll, to explore a variety of models that 
displayed both sides of the paper. John published a remarka-
ble collection of such designs in his book, Origami Inside-Out 
(Antroll, 1993). Aft er some extensive searching, Russell not 
only found his original models, he took a look at Michael’s 
butterfl y designs and went back to explore more variations of 
his own! He had originally started with a Yoshizawa butterfl y 
design, and more recently has developed several new designs 
from frog and lily bases.
Lasell College invited Michael to set up a two-fl oor show 
of original origami art at their Yamawaki Art & Cultural 
Center in Newton, Massachusetts in 1994. Th e show included 
several butterfl ies folded from his handmade papers. We 
also released a self-published video folding tutorial, Origami 
Butterfl ies & Moths that provided close-up shots of Michael 
masterfully working the details—shaping, curling, and tweak-
ing the models. He became a popular origami instructor at 
schools, libraries, and quite frequently at Th e Butterfl y Place 
Russell Cashdollar designed and folded this display of colorful origami butterﬂ ies, which inspired LaFosse to revisit and expand his own folded butterﬂ y repertoire.
Michael LaFosse’s Origami Butterfl ies 
6
