13
Origami Butterfl ies Have So Many Uses!
We all waste too much. Some discarded materials are 
quite beautiful, and suitable for reuse as origami butterfl ies. 
Convert pretty trash to treasure by folding up scraps of fi ne 
papers that are too small for other uses. 
If you enjoy scrapbooking, fold butterfl ies for special re-
membrances from mementos of a joyful event. Save a special 
wrapper, brochure, or ticket stub from a memorable outing 
and incorporate it into your organized journal of an active 
life. Many folders also use scrapbooks for future folding refer-
ence, by mounting their favorite origami butterfl y step-folds 
in the proper sequence. (Try using one or two-inch squares.) 
If the origami object becomes fully three dimensional in the 
fi nal stages, simply substitute snapshots for the folded paper 
when documenting those closing steps. 
Family gatherings and celebrations are perfect occasions to 
use color-coordinated origami butterfl y decorations! 
Accessorize your gift s of fl oral bouquets and house plants 
with a butterfl y to add that special personal touch. 
Origami butterfl ies make unique interior decorations and 
can be simply pinned to curtains or draperies. When guests are 
coming, use them instead of chocolates as a calorie-sparing pil-
low adornments in the guest room. Set the table with origami 
butterfl ies affi  xed to candlesticks (away from fl ames, of course), 
napkin rings, or to personalize each guest’s wineglass.
Origami butterfl ies love to travel, especially through the 
mail. As “puzzle” notes, write your note on the square fi rst, and 
then fold it and send it in an envelope with its wings closed! 
Last year, during the holidays, we enjoyed a cheerful tree, 
stringing origami butterfl ies with bright ribbon and a bead to 
become festive, hanging ornaments. 
Th e United States and many nations have interesting pa-
per currency, so fold some cash into butterfl ies to use as tips 
or gift s (see page 23 for more). 
The butterﬂ y in this card symbolically spreads its wings when opened.
A beautiful butterﬂ y provides the perfect ﬁ nishing touch to gift wrapping.
An origami butterﬂ y  on a card lends a personal element 
that store bought cards just can’t provide.
