Michael LaFosse’s Origami Butterfl ies 
12
We love to frame origami butterfl ies in shadowboxes for the 
wall. Use them to celebrate an important day—perhaps a wed-
ding or anniversary. Th e First Wedding Anniversary is also 
known as Th e Paper Anniversary! When displayed in pairs, 
these butterfl ies oft en symbolize a special, joyful relationship. 
When framed in small groups, we have used them to rep-
resent families, perhaps to welcome a child. Th ey also make 
wonderful house-warming gift s. We oft en include mounted 
sequences (or step-folds) to symbolize metamorphosis, show-
ing the steps from an open square to the fi nished butterfl y. 
For the natural history lovers, Riker-box (compartmental-
ized display case) mounted, “vegetarian” butterfl y collections 
of your favorite “fantasy species” could be just the right gift . 
Our more dramatic artistic presentations sometimes feature 
swarms of similar colors or styles, oft en on a handmade paper 
background representing grass, blossoms, or leaves. 
Paper butterfl ies make cheerful greeting cards, either as 
cover decorations (especially fi tting for Mother’s Day, gradua-
tions, St. Valentine’s Day, get well, or friendship cards). 
You can also fasten the butterfl y inside the center of the 
card, and it will act as a pop-up element, fl exing its wings 
when the card is opened. 
Th ere are dozens of appropriate social and offi  ce uses for 
origami butterfl ies as well. Use them to spice up banquet 
place cards, name tags, or ID badges. Instead of purchasing 
package bows or gift  tags, fold a friendly origami butterfl y. 
When you receive a nicely wrapped gift , save some of the 
paper. Butterfl ies folded from squares cut from that wrap can 
become a thoughtful “thank you” that harkens back to the 
original present. 
Origami Butterﬂ ies Have So Many Uses!
Butterfl ies are pollinators, and so origami butterfl ies have become a symbol, not only of change, but of communi-
cation, sharing, and the spread of knowledge. Fold butterfl ies with children to help them make their own per-
sonalized decorations for jackets, book bags, and backpacks. Th ey are easily interchangeable when fastened with 
magnetic clips or Velcro dots. Use them for your own personal enjoyment, as earrings, pins, barrettes, and other 
origami jewelry.
Wearable origami butterﬂ y art is sure to garner compliments.
Express your creativity with 
origami butterﬂ y jewelry.
