17
Using Fine Quality Art Materials
Most stores that carry fi ne papers specialize in wedding invita-
tions, but may also carry hand marbled and fancy printed 
sheets that could become beautiful origami butterfl ies. Count-
less shades of handmade paper from Asia and India are on 
the market today, but many of the commonly used dyes fade 
quickly. When you are selecting stock at fi ne papers stores, 
examine the exposed margins of display sheets for signs of 
fading, and ask the experts if they know the colorfastness rat-
ings of the papers they stock. Look for the words “acid free” 
and “archival” on the labels. (Even with these designations, we 
have seen some of these papers fade.)
At Origamido Studio, we design and make our own cus-
tom papers for each piece of exhibition-quality folded art. We 
have found that fi ber from specially grown plants, including 
abaca, hemp, cotton, fl ax, mitsumata, gampi, and kozo (also 
called paper mulberry) works best for our folded art. We 
sometimes cook and clean the fi bers, and always beat and 
condition the pulp ourselves. Th at way, we can confi dently 
control the other variables that aff ect the characteristics of the 
paper with reliable results. Our workshops for other origami 
artists show them how to make the perfect paper for their art. 
Th e project photos for this book were all folded from 
Origamido duo papers. We applied a water soluble adhesive 
between two sheets of diff erent colors, pressed, and then dried 
them again to make duo sheets. (We use methyl cellulose gel, a 
refi ned food additive that is also commonly sold as wallpaper 
paste.) Since butterfl y wings have tiny scales, we oft en add 
ground mica mineral when coloring the pulp slurry to lend a 
beautiful sheen to the fi nished paper’s surface. 
If this sounds like too much work, take heart. White or neu-
tral Japanese washi (a term that refers to any high quality paper 
made in Japan, but oft en made from mulberry pulp) is available 
at art store chains and from Internet suppliers. It is easy to cus-
tomize washi to make it any shade you want using artist-quality 
acrylic paints. Some of the butterfl ies in our photographs also 
sport acrylic washes of iridescent paint applied to our own 
Origamido papers. Th ese paints are formulated for airbrush 
application, but also work well when applied by brush, and are 
available in most art supply stores. For more information, we 
discuss making, selecting, and preparing fi ne papers for lasting 
art in our book, Japanese Paper Craft ing. Our other art titles, 
Advanced Origami, and Origami Art (all from Tuttle Publish-
ing) may also be of interest to the aspiring origami artist.
ABOVE Luscious, archival, and 
destined to become butterﬂ ies, 
these Origamido papers are 
handmade by Michael LaFosse 
and Richard Alexander.
BELOW LEFT Why not make your 
own, custom handmade papers? 
Paper making supplies and kits 
are easy to ﬁ nd. Small, letter pa-
per sized sheets are easy to make 
and don’t require a major setup 
in your home. Your custom-made 
papers will make very special 
keepsakes of your butterﬂ ies.
RIGHT A display rack of hand-
made Origamido paper at Origa-
mido Studio. 
