Michael LaFosse’s Origami Butterfl ies 
4
The Metamorphosis of an Origami Artist
by Richard Alexander, Origamido Studio Cofounder
Decorative paper folding has been around for at least a few hun-
dred years in Japan, but this early repertoire seems to include 
only a few dozen models. In 1937, Akira Yoshizawa embraced 
origami as his occupation. By 1952, a commission by Asahi 
Graf for a new set of zodiac origami brought him fame. Th e 
response encouraged him to continue to design new origami 
in his own style of expressive paper folding. Yoshizawa is now 
considered by many to be the father of expressive art origami. 
Michael G. LaFosse grew up in Fitchburg, Massachusetts. 
Even as a young child he was particularly good at making 
things of paper, and he worked his way through the craft  and 
origami books at the local library. He was a teenager when he 
saw color photos of works by origami master Akira Yoshizawa 
in a 1970 article in Reader’s Digest. Th is was the fi rst time he 
realized it was possible to design your own origami. It was 
also the fi rst origami he considered as expressive art, and he 
read that article over and over again. Th e powerful photos 
alone gave him the aspiration to become an origami artist! He 
realized that Yoshizawa’s paper was much diff erent than any he 
had seen—much heavier than any he had folded. Yoshizawa’s 
paper allowed soft er folds and expressive, curved lines.
Fortunately for him, Fitchburg was a paper-making town, 
so Michael was able to learn about paper-making processes 
and materials from his friends’ parents who worked in the 
mills. Eventually he found a way to make whatever type of pa-
per he needed for his folded art, and he soon learned to locate 
quality materials in the Boston area. 
Th e origami books Michael had borrowed had mentioned 
Lillian Oppenheimer and her Origami Center of America in 
New York City. In 1977, Michael found himself in New York, 
and he paid an initial visit to Lillian. A short time later, he 
returned with his origami creations, and showed her his real-
istic bat, cattleya orchid, horseshoe crab, and several lifelike 
birds. Lillian invited several friends to see his works and to 
fold with Michael. He spent a week there, sleeping on Lillian’s 
couch, and met Michael Shall, who taught him how to fold 
Akira Yoshizawa’s butterfl y (from a waterbomb base). During 
this visit he also met Alice Gray, who worked in the entomol-
ogy section at the American Museum of Natural History. She 
admired his complex praying mantis, and she invited him 
to see the insects at the museum. As they rode the subway 
uptown to the museum, Michael folded his fi rst origami 
butterfl y from a pink, 8½” x 11” piece of scrap paper. Alice 
admired it, but lamented it was not from a square. Th e bus 
trip back home to Fitchburg gave him hours for exploration, 
and he settled on three variations of the Butterfl y for Alice 
Gray, each folded from a square.
At the time, Michael’s complex models were dismissed by 
some in New York as “paper sculpture,” and “not really ori-
gami” the way they saw it, so he did not return to New York for 
many years. Even so, he was still actively creating and folding 
origami art during that period. Most of his signature works 
were developed in that time. He even published and sold draw-
ings for his origami F-14 Tomcat Fighter Jet (one of 28 original 
paper airplane designs that now appear in the hardcover book 
and DVD set, Planes for Brains, (Tuttle Publishing). 
We met in 1988, when Michael was working as a chef, and 
folding in the wee hours of the morning aft er the restaurant 
had closed. His apartment had piles of crumpled paper, and I 
was overwhelmed by the beauty and complexity of his origa-
mi masterworks the fi rst time I saw them. I found his work so 
spectacular, I off ered to help him exhibit it, and soon we were 
mounting and framing it, videotaping his folding sequences, 
and making special papers in the garage. We set up exhibits 
at craft  fairs and museums. Buoyed by the public’s response, 
Michael called Lillian in 1991, and the timing could not have 
been more perfect. She invited him to a master class by Akira 
Yoshizawa in Ossining, New York, which is where he fi nally 
met Yoshizawa (as well as Emiko Kruckner, Jonathan Baxter, 
and other advanced folders from all over the country). 
Michael LaFosse’s Origami Butterfl ies 
4
